As people interested in geography and nature,
it is usually quite easy to nail a
countries’ or region’s geography with
a single word. Switzerland? Mountains.
Qatar? Desert. And Borneo? Rainforest.
But doing the same exercise for the
Golden State of the US, California,
too many beautiful and dramatic landscapes,
national parks, mountains, deserts and coastlines
are popping up, so perhaps the only correct
word to describe its geography is diversity.
To truly appreciate California’s
incredible scale and variety,
let’s embark on an all encompassing journey
around the Central Valley, beginning in the
Colorado Desert where the sands of the Sonoran
desert are crossing the Mexican border.
Chapter 1: Colorado Desert
Characterized by extreme aridity,
the Colorado Desert is the classic image of
the wild west. Dry scrublands and sandstone
monoliths are standing in front of a dramatic
mountain backdrop in almost every direction.
While the Colorado River, which lends its
name to the desert, only flows along the
eastern flanks where it marks the state border
to Arizona, it has actually had a significant
impact on the desert’s history and geography.
Approximately 90% of the water which makes it
to the Imperial dam of the Colorado River is being
diverted into the Imperial and Coachella Valleys,
supplying 100 miles of lush fields with irrigation
water and mocking mother nature in the meantime.
Since the early 20th century, three major canals
have carried the Colorado River water across
the desert but such defiance of the natural
order doesn’t come without its consequences.
As a result of a dam breach over a century ago,
the man-made Salton Sea has formed in the center
of the valley, which has since been kept alive
by excess canal water and irrigation runoff.
Since this water is contaminated from the
farming runoff, a crust of salts, trace
metals and pesticides is now surrounding the lake
shore and the winds blowing across the valley can
sometimes make these pollutants airborne, creating
hazardous dust storms. Luckily though, at 72
meters or 236 feet below sea level and surrounded
by mountains, the valley’s geography helps shield
the neighboring Mojave Desert from these problems.
Chapter 2: Mojave Desert
Behind the Joshua Tree National Park to the north,
the second major desert of California opens up and
even though they are in such close proximity,
there are some very distinct differences.
Although only a thin mountain range separates
the two deserts, the rain shadow effect from
the Sierra Nevada and Transverse Ranges is
much stronger in the Mojave. This can be seen
with the summer monsoon clouds for example,
which come in through the Gulf of California
and provide the occasional rainfall to the
Sonoran Desert. With the Orocopia and Little
San Bernardino mountains in the way however,
not even these clouds reach the Mojave Desert.
While areas south of the mountains
receive around 200 mm of rain annually,
the core of the Mojave Desert gets as little
as 40, so vegetation becomes even more sparse here.
Mainly the Joshua Tree thrives at the deserts
elevations between 600 to 1,200 meters but despite
this elevation, dramatic mountainscapes tower
along the horizon almost everywhere you look.
Especially in the northern half, these ridges
typically run in a northerly-southernly direction,
where millions of years of tectonic stretching
and faulting have built the up to 3350 meter
or 11.000 feet tall mountains, while
also sinking the adjoining desert floor.
The dramatic landscape creates pockets of intense
aridity, where salt flats and alluvial fans from
ancient lakes make the land even more forbidding.
Well over 100 years ago, the village of Furnace
Creek actually experienced the highest natural
temperature ever recorded on planet earth, where
on a fateful Thursday afternoon, the temperature
rose to 56.7 °C or 134.1 °F. By then, the valley
was already known as Death Valley and the National
Park which has been established around it in the
late 20th century doesn’t just contain the hottest
place on earth, but also the lowest depression of
the continent. Sitting another 14 meters below
the shores of Salton Sea, Badwater Basin reaches
a low point of 86 meters below sea level,
making Death Valley a place of true extremes.
But the mountains surrounding it also hold their own records.
Chapter 3: The Sierra Nevada
Just 130 kilometers west of this
extreme point, the Sierra Nevada Mountains are
reaching for the opposite extreme. Demarcating
the western flank of the Mojave Desert and
extending all the way into northern California,
the Sierra Nevada are drawing the eastern
wall around the Central Valley and within
this massive mountain range, the tallest summit of
the contiguous United States soars in the clouds.
The extremely jagged ridge line of Mount
Whitney stands at 14500 feet or 4420 meters
above sea level and is caused by a massive block
of granite that is anchored in the surrounding
fault system penetrating the surface.
The mountain range as a whole extends
for 640 kilometers or 400 miles north to south
and next to Mount Whitney houses an additional
11 fourteeners, meaning mountain peaks above
14.000 feet in elevation, easily putting the
state into S Tier for high alpine mountaineering,
alongside Colorado, Washington and Alaska. Yet,
perhaps the most famous aspect of the Sierra
Nevada is not its peaks, but the vast forests
that fill its valleys and slopes.
From Sequoia National Park in the
south to the Sierra, Stanislaus, Tahoe,
Plumas, and Lassen National Forests,
these valleys and granite outcrops are home
to some of the world’s most remarkable trees.
The most famous of these is easily the General
Sherman in the Sequoia National Park. Standing
at a proud height of 84 meters, and
with a circumference of 31 meters,
it is the most voluminous tree on the planet, but
the records don’t stop here. A different specimen
of the same species just a couple of miles to
the east holds the record for the thickest limbs,
while a Bristlecone Pine in the Inyo National
Forest has sprouted its roots over 4800 years
ago in the center of the White Mountains, making
it the oldest currently living tree in the world.
Staying within the topic of geographic records,
straddling the border between California and
Nevada, Lake Tahoe is the largest alpine lake of
North America, and with a basin depth of 501 meters
its volume only falls short of the Great Lakes.
Having reached the upper third of California now,
and being surrounded by an alpine topography,
the climate has shifted dramatically from
the southerly deserts, and the annual climate
graph is more comparable to temperate European
climates found in the Netherlands or northern
Germany with one very noticeable difference.
While temperatures and precipitation is nearly
identical, the annual snowfall is one of the
highest in the world when comparing it to other
populated places and the 180 inches or 4.5 meter
of snow actually far exceed the snowiest
major cites of Canada by almost a meter.
This climate has turned the mountains around
Lake Tahoe into a winter sports hotspot and
sets the tone for what we can expect
around California’s northernmost region. Bringing us to
Chapter 4: The Northern Mountains
As the tall ridges of the Sierra Nevada fade, the
high elevation stays, forming the 1.000.000 acre
large Modoc Plateau. Looking at a rock type map
of California, a drastic shift takes place here
with the old Metamorphic Rock of the Sierra Nevada
being replaced by young Igneous rock spanning
the whole northeastern corner of the state.
Metamorphic here means that the rock has
formed out of previous rock through pressure
and chemical processes, while igneous rock
can be considered as “1st generation” rock
from magma which has protruded earth's surface.
The pyroclastic fragments and tuff beds across
the volcanic tableland are another visual proof
of this shift, and the influence of volcanoes
becomes even more pronounced as we head west.
Rising on the western flanks of the highlands,
the southernmost extent of the Cascade Range
forms a significant boundary between the Pacific
coast and the interior of the United States,
housing some of the US’s most famous volcanoes
like Mount Saint Helens, Mount Rainier,
or Mount Hood in Oregon and Washington.
The Californian section also has some impressive
features to offer though with the flanks of
its tallest active stratovolcano Mount Shasta
accommodating two massive glacial arms hugging
the mountain. While Global warming is usually
a slow but certain death sentence to glaciers,
the Whitney and Hotlum Glaciers seem to defy the
norm here. Despite rising temperatures over the past
150 years, increased snowfall has allowed
the Whitney and Hotlum Glaciers to grow,
making them among the few glaciers
worldwide that are currently expanding.
The mechanism responsible for these
stratovolcanoes scattering the landscape
is the Cascadia Subduction Zone, just
offshore of the Klamath Mountains,
the neighbouring mountain range to the west.
Deep underground, a triple junction of the Gorda,
Pacific and North American tectonic plate has
created a highly unstable environment. All three
plates are moving into different directions,
creating a network of subduction and transform
faults where tectonic friction is building up a
long overdue thrust, which will eventually shake
up the region. The last large earthquake here has been
over 300 years ago now and regular small tremors
are possibly foreshadowing what is to come.
From the triple junction near Eureka,
the world-famous San Andreas Fault marks
the boundary between the Pacific and North
American plates, leading us to the final
major mountain range of our journey and to
Chapter 5: The Coastal Ranges
Drawing an arc through the State
of California, the San Andreas Fault is
a massive transform boundary which has
been the cause for countless earthquakes
but also largescale uplift of the land
across its 800 mile or 1200 kilometer
extent to the Gulf of California.
Running along the San Andreas’ eastern
edge, the Coastal Ranges are forming the
final enclosure to the central valley and the
two constituting sub ranges in the north and
south slowly transition the climate back to
the aridity that our journey started with.
Within the northern range, an east-west division
is marked by the Eel and Russian River which
occupy the broad valley in between them and
several valley pockets are nestled throughout
the heavily forested mountain slopes. Many
of these are filled with the snow runoff of
the surrounding summits and the largest one of
these, called Clear Lake, occupies an elevated
basin at around 420 meters above the sea level.
According to the US Geological Survey, which has
extensively analyzed the sediment core samples of the
lake bottom in the 70s, this lake is actually the
oldest lake of the North American Continent.
Resting on stable bedrock and maintaining
a delicate balance between sedimentation
and subsidence, Clear Lake has held water
continuously for an astonishing 475,000 years now.
The only outflow of this lake directs the water
towards the east, where it merges with nearly
all other streams that find their way into
the central valley. And once the main stems of the
Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers are combined,
they find a gap between the Northern and
Southern Coastal Range, and fill a massive
basin between the mountain ranges.
The entire system spans 90 kilometers North
to South and over 70 kilometers from the River
mouths to San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge,
which marks the boundary to the Pacific Ocean.
This far-spanning wetland was once part of Lake
Corcoran, an ancient lake which occupied
the central valley. Once tectonic shifts
and erosion broke through the Golden
Gate however, the whole section turned
into a river bed which drained the lake.
During the ice ages, shifting sea levels
repeatedly transformed the region from dry plain
to estuary, leading to today’s shallow bay, where
most areas outside the main channel are just a few
meters deep. These shallow shore areas now host
mudflats that are vital to the Pacific Flyway,
supporting millions of migratory birds each year.
On both sides of the San Francisco Bay, behind
the headquarters of the most influential tech
companies in the world, the Californian Coastal
Ranges continue their parallel ridges all the
way down to California's most populous city. The
climate here shifts again from the warm mediterranean
climate of northern and central California,
back to the aridity which has defined the
deserts from the beginning of our journey.
A total of 18.5 million people spread over
13 cities surpassing the 100.000 inhabitants
mark, are settled in the Los Angeles Basin
which is surrounded by mountains and the Pacific
Ocean on all sides. From the southern outskirts,
it is a mere 1 hour drive past the Little San
Bernardino Mountains for us to have come full
circle around California, and we are back
in the desert heat of the Coachella Valley.
As a whole, California is a true epitome of
geographical diversity. Covering everything from
the snowiest mountains to the driest valleys,
from lush forests to prosperous wetlands,
from active stratovolcanoes to Salt Lakes and the
most influential metropolitan areas in the world.
I hope you enjoyed this roundtrip through what
I consider the most exciting state in the US.
If you want to learn more about
California's neighbour to the east,
I can recommend this one about the Geography
of the Rocky Mountains, or watch what youtube thinks is
best for you here. And if you want to further
support the work I am doing for this channel here,
you can now also leave a small donation at
my buy me a coffee page with the link in
the description in the middle of the screen
right now. See you in the next one, cheers.